# Evaluation-of-First-and-Last-Mile-FALM-Bicycle-Network-Connectivity-Using-Proposed-Novel-Algorithms

## Md Mintu Miah1*Nicholas Fournier2, Alexander Skabardonis3
###*1Postdoctoral Researcher, SafeTREC and PATH, University of California Berkeley, 310 Mclaughlin Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720; Corresponding Email: mmmiah@berkeley.edu; ORCID: 0000-0001-6073-3896

###2Planner and Engineer, Resource Systems Group, Inc; Email: nichfournier@gmail.com; ORCID: 0000-0002-4722-4138
###3Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, University of California Berkeley, 320 Mclaughlin Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720; Email: dromeas@berkeley.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-7064-5993

#Abstract
The improved first and last-mile (FALM) network connectivity encourages more people to use bicycles as a transportation mode due to its reduced costs and health benefits. Past bicycle network connectivity evaluations neglected user stress due to traffic volume and road gradients and failed to quantify the connectivity scores to better understand the level of connectivity. This study aims to evaluate the transit stops FALM connectivity using novel proposed weighted shortest path-based algorithms named Bicycle Network Connectivity (BNC) and Low-Stress Network Connectivity (LSNC). The algorithms were weighted with an impedance, which was the function of the Level of Traffic Stress (LTS), road segment slope, and length. We have considered 2360 transit stops from San Francisco to test FALM connectivity. The results indicate that San Francisco transit stops are better connected through a low-stress network than a bike network. We found that 25% of transit stops have connectivity of at least 0.75, while one-quarter of the transit stops (N=590) connectivity varies from 0 to 0.27 through the low-stress network. One-fifth of the transit stops (21%= 504 stops) connectivity scores are equal to greater than 0.20, while the remaining large number of the transit stops connectivity score is less than 0.20 through the designated bicycle network.  The developed methodology of this study will help agencies evaluate their network as well as transit stop connectivity. The obtained connectivity score will help the agency to understand where the network is poorly connected and might need improvement of infrastructure.

#Practical Applications
Generally, first and last-mile connectivity is important to attract more people to use bicycles from home to transit stops or vice versa. However, it is critical for the agencies to understand how much their transit stops are connected with their surroundings and where connectivity improvement is required through building new infrastructures. This study proposed new weighted shortest path-based algorithms to measure transit stops FALM connectivity using LTS, road gradients, and length of the segments. The algorithms can also be applied for entire network connectivity measurements through designated bicycle facilities or low-stress networks. The practitioner can apply these methods to measure the connectivity for the transit stops to decide on future possible network connectivity improvements.
##Keywords: Network, Level of Traffic Stress, Connectivity, Shortest Path, Bicycle, Transit Stops, First and Last Mile	

